Jupyerlab and jupytext (#225)
merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io: py-jupyter.md

The JupyterLab launcher page is shown on startup,
to create a new notebook,
click the big Python tile under the notebook section or go to `File --> New --> Notebook`.
If you click on the File Browser in the sidebar to the left (the topmost folder icon),
you will see that a new file has been created in the current directory.
The File Browser can be used to open existing notebooks and other file types.
The new notebook is named `Untitled.ipynb` by default.
Right-click the name in the notebook tab,
and change it to `getting-started.ipynb`.

The notebook is divided into cells.
Initially, there will be a single input cell.
 <!--com: TODO add screenshot? -->
You can type Python code directly into this cell,
just as we did before in the IPython terminal.
To run the code,
click the play button in the toolbar or press <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Enter</kbd>.

```{python}
4 + 5
```

The output will appears just under the input cell.
By default,
the next existing cell is selected,
or a new empty one is created if there is no next cell.
You can press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Enter</kbd> to stay on the current cell after running code.

In an input cell,

> you can split the code across several lines as needed.

Author: Agree, your wording makes it clear.

```{python}
a = 4
a * 2
```

You might have noticed that there is a little counter on the left of each cell.
This counter keeps track of in which order the cells were executed,
so that you are aware if they cells have been run out of sequential order.

> The counter symbol changes to an `*` when a computation is running,

Author: Isn't this correct though, since it is the pronunciation that decides? Likewise, `an hour` and `a university` would appear visually strange at first, but we're so used to it that we don't react.

(also available via `Run --> Run all cells` in the toolbar menu).
Conveniently,
the command palette also shows a command's keyboard shortcut.
The last tab (the wrench icon) is for advanced cell settings,
which is outside the scope of this material.

### How to get help {#py-how-to-get-help}

 <!--TODO Depending on where this section will be in the book, some of these concepts might not have been introduced (packages, lists). -->

Once you start out using Python,
you don't know what functions are available within each package.
If you're working with the `numpy` package in a Jupyter notebook,
you can type `numpy.`<kbd>Tab</kbd> (that is numpy + period + tab-key)
and a small menu will pop up showing all the available functions in the `numpy` module.
There are plenty of available functions,
so it can be helpful to filter the menu
by typing the initial letters of the function name.

 <!--TODO Add screenshots? -->
To get more info on the function you want to use,
you can type out the full name and then press <kbd>Shift + Tab</kbd>
to bring up a help dialogue.
For the `numpy.mean` function
you can see that the first argument `a` should be "array-like".

> An array is essentially just a sequence of numbers,

Reviewer: I think put this sentence in brackets since it's a bit of an aside - you're only talking specifically about how to get help in the notebook interface.
```suggestion
(An "array-like" object is a sequence of numbers
```

> such as a list `[]` or tuple `()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as a list `[]`, tuple `()`, or numpy array.)
```

Instead of manually activating the pop up menu every time,
JupyterLab offers a tool called "Contextual Help",
which displays help information automatically as you type.

> This very useful and it is a good habit to always have it open next to the Notebook.

Reviewer: Maybe say here how to get Contextual Help displayed next to the notebook?

More help is available via the "Help" menu,
which links to useful online resources
(for example `Help --> JupyterLab Reference`).
The unformatted docstring can be seen by prepending or appending a `?` to the function name, e.g. `numpy.mean?`.

> Two `?` (`numpy.mean??`) will show the full source code for the function.

Reviewer: Move these sentences above "More help is available..." since they're more about functions and the "Help" menu is more general.

When you start getting familiar with typing function names,

> you will notice that this is often faster than looking for functions in menus,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you will notice that typing is often faster than looking for functions in menus,
```

> such as in spreadsheet program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as in a spreadsheet program.
```

However,
sometimes you forget
and it is useful to get hints via the help systems described above.

### Version control with notebooks {#py-version-control-with-notebooks}

> Jupyter notebooks are stored as JSON-files with an .ipynb extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jupyter notebooks are stored as JSON files with a .ipynb extension.
```

> These are specially formatted text files,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are specially-formatted text files
```

which are read and rendered by JupyterLab.

> JSON files are efficiently read by machine and it is a common data exchange format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON file format is efficiently read by machines and it is a common data exchange format.
```

However,
they are not always that easy to read for humans,
which can create problems when working with Jupyter notebooks under version control.
The Markdown format is easier for us to read
and facilitates reading version control diffs and making more granular commits.
You also don't have to worry about accidentally misplacing braces within the JSON file,

> which would cause the notebook to fail to render.

Reviewer: How would this happen? Do you mean like if you're adding commits with --patch and it splits it weird? I think you can probably take this sentence out, it's probably not relevant for beginners.

Author: Yes, if for any reason you need to edit the json directly, most often with `--patch`. You're right, probably of minor relevance here.

> Jupytext is a JupyterLab extension that enables saving of notebook in plain text formats,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jupytext is a JupyterLab extension that can automatically save Jupyter notebooks in plain text formats,
```

such as Markdown.
The plain text notebook is two-way synced with the `.ipynb` file,
so that when either of the files change,
the other is updated to reflect this change.
Jupytext supports the R Markdown format,
which extends the Markdown syntax with some useful features for notebooks,
and which is used to generate reproducible reports from R Notebooks
via the R Studio IDE.

> Using the R Markdown format for our notebooks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the R Markdown format for our notebooks,
```

> we take advantage of a well established format for reproducible analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we take advantage of a well-established format for reproducible analysis.
```

If needed, we also have access to the publishing options
available via the R Studio IDE
(R Markdown builds upon Pandoc,
which is the most extensive Mardown specification,
with support for more advanced scholarly features
such as inline citations and cross-references).

To install Jupytext, open a terminal and type the following
(if you installed JupyterLab in another conda environment than the base,
make sure to first switch to that environment).

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge jupytext
```

Restart JupyterLab and click OK when asked to rebuild the application,
this makes the Jupytext extension part of JupyterLab.
The Jupytext commands are all available from the command palette.
Create a new notebook and click on the command palette icon in the sidebar.
Type "pair" and you will see all the Jupytext commands.
Click on "Pair Notebook with R Markdown",
 <!--TODO Screenshot from doc? -->
this is the only Jupytext command we need to use.
That's it!

> Your `.ipynb` notebook is now linked to an `.Rmd` file with the same name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the next file save, your `.ipynb` notebook is now linked to a `.Rmd` file with the same name.
```

Open up the File Browser from the sidebar
and you can see that the new file has been created in the same directory.
The pairing needs to be done once for each notebook,

> or can be setup to occur for [all notebooks automatically][jupytext-global-config].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or can be set up to occur for [all notebooks automatically][jupytext-global-config].
```

[jupytext-global-config]: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/using-server.html#global-configuration

Since Jupytext can open `.Rmd` files as notebooks,

> you only need to commit the `.Rmd` file to version control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you only need to commit the `.Rmd` file to version control, and you only need the `.Rmd` file to regenerate the notebook file.
```

This is the feature that Elizabeth really liked when I was doing the demo!

`.Rmd` files open as text when double clicked in the JupyterLab file browser.
To open them as notebooks,
right click the filename and select "Open with".
A `.ipynb` file will be created if it doesn't already exist.
Since `.Rmd` files do not store the notebooks' output cells,
the code will need to be run again to recreate the output.
Running the entire notebook is good practice since it ensures reproducibility,
and it is important to do this before sharing it with a collaborator.
Otherwise,
you might have run some of the cells out of order,
or are working with a variable from a cell that you have since deleted,
so that once your collaborator tries to run the file in sequential order,

> the would (in the best case scenario) get an error 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they would (in the best case scenario) get an error 
```

and (in the worst case scenario) they might get a different output without noticing.

> Collaborating with `.Rmd` files makes it easier for collaborators to review pull request,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collaborating with `.Rmd` files makes it easier for collaborators to see and make changes,
```
